---
Title: 17.1 Functions of the Endocrine System
Course: BIO222
Categories: Lesson Snippet
Reference: Seeley's Anatomy and Physiology 13ed
Chapter: 17
Section: "17.1"
Created: Spring 2023
tags:
  - APII
  - Endocrine
---

# Functions of the Endocrine System
### Main Points
1. The endocrine system includes glands and specialized endocrine cells that secrete hormones into the bloodstream.
2. A hormone is a chemical messenger that is secreted into the blood, travels to a distant target tissue, and binds to specific receptors to produce a coordinated set of events in that target tissue.

### Comparison of the Nervous and Endocrine Systems

The endocrine system and the nervous system are closely related.
1. They share anatomical structures in the brain.
2. They share molecules that are both neurotransmitters and hormones.
3. They cooperate to regulate important processes.
4. They both have chemical messengers that bind to the same receptor type.

### The endocrine system and the nervous system have important differences.
1. Neurotransmitters deliver their chemical messengers directly, whereas hormones travel in the bloodstream.
2. The endocrine system is slower than the nervous system.
3. The endocrine system has longer lasting effects than the nervous system.
4. The endocrine system operates by amplitude-modulated signals while the nervous system operates by frequency-modulated signals.

### Overview of Endocrine-Regulated Processes

There are four major categories of processes that are coordinated by the endocrine system.

1. Growth and development
2. Metabolism
3. Blood composition
4. Reproduction

### Classes of Chemical Messengers
1. The four classes of chemical messengers are autocrine, paracrine, neurotransmitter, and endocrine.
2. Endocrine chemical messengers are called hormones.
