---
Reference: Seeley's Anatomy and Physiology 13ed
Chapter: "17"
Section: "17.2"
Created: Spring 2023
tags:
  - APII
---
### 17.2 Hormones

#### Control of Hormone Secretion

**Stimulation of Hormone Release**

Three types of stimuli result in hormone secretion: humoral, neural, and hormonal.
1. **Humoral stimulation** is exhibited by hormones that are sensitive to circulating blood levels of certain molecules, such as glucose or calcium.
2. **Neural stimuli** cause hormone secretion in direct response to action potentials in neurons, as occurs during stress or exercise. Hormones from the hypothalamus that cause the release of other hormones are called releasing hormones.
3. **Hormonal stimulation** of other hormone secretion is common in the endocrine system. Hormones from the anterior pituitary that stimulate hormones from other endocrine glands are called tropic hormones.

**Inhibition of Hormone Release**

Although the stimulus of hormone secretion is important, inhibition is equally important.
1. Humoral substances can inhibit the secretion of hormones.
2. Neural stimuli can prevent hormone secretion.
3. Inhibiting hormones prevent hormone release.

**Patterns of Hormone Secretion**

The three main patterns of hormone secretions are chronic, acute, and episodic.
1. **Chronic hormone secretion** results in hormones whose circulating levels are relatively constant.
2. **Acute hormone secretion** results in hormone levels that can vary dramatically.
3. **Episodic hormone secretion** results in a cyclic pattern of hormone release.

#### Classes of Hormones

1. There are two chemical categories of hormones: lipid-soluble and water-soluble.
2. **Lipid-soluble hormones** include steroids, thyroid hormones, and some fatty acid derivatives.
   - Most lipid-soluble hormones are transported bound to binding proteins. Thus, their half-life extends from minutes to weeks.
   - Lipid-soluble hormones are removed from the circulation by conjugation to sulfate or glucuronic acid, which then allows them to be excreted in the bile.
3. **Water-soluble hormones** include proteins, peptides, and amino acid derivatives.
   - Water-soluble hormones circulate freely in the blood.
   - Proteases degrade protein and peptide hormones in the circulation; the breakdown products are then excreted in the urine. However, some water-soluble hormones have chemical modifications, such as the addition of a carbohydrate group, which prolongs their half-life.
