---
Reference: Seeley's Anatomy and Physiology 13ed
Chapter: "17"
Section: "17.4"
Created: Spring 2023
tags:
  - APII
---
#### 17.4 Hormone Receptors and Mechanisms of Action

**Agonists and Antagonists**
1. Agonists mimic the actions of a natural hormone.
2. Antagonists block the action of a natural hormone.

**Classes of Receptors**
The two groups of hormones each have their own class of receptors.
1. Lipid-soluble hormones bind to nuclear receptors located inside the nucleus of the target cell.
2. Water-soluble hormones bind to membrane-bound receptors, which are integral membrane proteins.

**Action of Nuclear Receptors**
1. Nuclear receptors have portions that allow them to bind to the DNA in the nucleus once the hormone is bound.
   - The hormone-receptor complex activates genes, which in turn activate the DNA to produce mRNA.
   - The mRNA increases the synthesis of certain proteins that produce the target cell’s response.
2. Nuclear receptors cannot always respond immediately because it takes time to produce the mRNA and the protein.
3. Some lipid-soluble hormones mediate their effects through membrane-bound receptors.

**Membrane-Bound Receptors and Signal Amplification**
1. Membrane-bound receptors activate a cascade of events once the hormone binds.
2. Some membrane-bound receptors are associated with membrane proteins called G proteins.
   - Hormone binds to a membrane bound receptor, and G proteins are activated.
   - The α subunit of the G protein can bind to ion channels and cause them to open or change the rate of synthesis of intracellular mediators such as cAMP, cGMP, IP3, and DAG.
3. Intracellular enzymes can be activated directly, which in turn causes the synthesis of intracellular mediators, such as cGMP, or adds a phosphate group to intracellular enzymes, which alters their activity.
4. Second-messenger systems act rapidly because they act on already existing enzymes and produce an amplification effect.

**Target Tissue Sensitivity**
1. Hormones stimulate their targets by binding to proteins in the target cell called receptors.
2. A target cell may decrease its sensitivity to a hormone through desensitization, which can occur through a decrease in receptor number, a process called down-regulation.
3. A target cell may increase its sensitivity to a hormone through sensitization, which can occur through an increase in receptor number, a process called up-regulation.

**Hormone Interactions**
There are three types of interactions among hormones.
1. Permissive interactions
2. Synergistic interactions
